Would you hope that vaccine uptake rates
would go [music] up in the end? Yes. At
the end of the Trump era,
>> especially for the most important
vaccines. Yes.
>> Okay. All right. We can Well, that's
that's [music] a good metric and uh I'll
be back here in 3 years to talk about
it.
>> Americans faith in public health [music]
and medical authority seems pretty
broken right now. For the first time in
[music] a quarter century, America is in
danger of losing its measles-free
status.
>> All this as vaccination rates [music]
continue to decline. So, what would it
take to fix it? And can outsiders
[music] actually pull it off? That's the
test facing my guest this week, Dr. Jay
Badacharia.
>> If confirmed, I will establish a culture
of respect for free speech in science
and scientific descent at the NIH. The
former Stanford professor was once
[music] denounced as a fringe
epidemiologist for his critiques of CO
19 policies. [music]
>> For younger populations, frankly, CO is
less of a risk than the lockdowns.
>> Now, he's heading up [music] the world's
most important biomedical research
agency, the NIH.
Dr. Badacharia, welcome to Interesting
Times.
>> Thanks for having me on, Russ. I want to
start with a kind of general diagnosis
um of the collapse of public trust in
the medical establishment in America and
how I think the co 19 pandemic played
into it. I think this was a phenomenon
that existed before the corona virus
came along but it was clearly
accelerated by the experience of 2020
and afterward. Um, so just start by
talking me through your view of what
happened during COVID, which was also, I
should say, when you first became a
public controversialist.
>> Am I that now?
>> I mean, you've joined our ranks. I'm I'm
sorry to say, you know, but
>> can I just start with like where I came
from into into the co era? I mean, I was
a professor at Stanford for I think
20ome years up to that point took to
2020.
>> Um, I'd written what I thought were like
provocative papers. uh in part obviously
every every like five other people have
um but the co era to me represented a
fundamental break in my understanding of
how science and public health operated.
I mean I guess I was naive before the
pandemic. I thought I would tell my
students don't you know don't don't join
Twitter. Uh it was Twitter back then. Um
uh just publish your papers in in
scientific journals. That's how you make
the big difference in the world. Uh, I
thought public health had the best
interest of the of the the working
class, the poor in mind. Um, and the
COVID era shattered my illusions on all
of those fronts. Um, and in particular,
the uh what happened in March of 2020
represented a fundamental break that
public health authorities had with the
public. Um, and you know, it I can
understand why it happened. I mean, you
have a virus floating around that's new.
You get reports out of out of China
essentially that there are it's a it's a
three, four, 5% mortality rate, right?
>> You have videos of people collapsing on
the streets.
>> Collapsing on the streets. It's and so I
could understand at the time the you
know there's there's especially in the
face of deep uncertainty that there
something had to be done to guide
people. But uh what you're not allowed
to do is assume that the thing you're
doing is going to work. Right? I'm going
to do a lockdown. That'll solve the
problem. That'll get us to zero. You're
also not allowed to assume that the
thing that you're doing will have no
harms,
right? So, you close the schools. You
know for certain that you're going to
harm a generation of children.
That's a certainty.
Will that suppress the spread of the
disease? We don't know how the disease
spreads. Is it aerosol? Is it is it uh
is it is it is it droplet? Is it you
know there's a 100 uncertainties? You
still have to do that kind of honest
calculation and you have to convey that
deep uncertainty to the public at large.
>> So I mean you you're deeply critical of
lockdowns closures right but from my
perspective at the time we didn't know
how serious the disease was. We didn't
know how it affected children for
instance in schools. I had little kids
in school at the time. Um, and [snorts]
it seemed to me that there was an
argument essentially for two weeks a
month, like kind of these policies as
extreme but temporary measures. Do you
think that there is
room for taking extreme measures like we
took in that period as a means of buying
time?
>> Like I I could be persuaded that that
that could be a reasonable thing
potentially. But let's think about the
actual context, right? So, in March of
2020, I wrote an op-ed in the in the
Wall Street Journal. It's the first time
I ever wrote an oped in my life. It's
you you're old hand at this, but that it
weirdly scary thing.
>> It's once you've crossed that line.
Yeah. You [laughter] can never you can
never recross it. It's true.
>> I I wrote this oped and I did some
calculations using the uh the uh the
Diamond Princess. Remember that cruise
ship that was floating around?
>> You could see the relative risk really
really easily in the data. It was really
older people that was high risk and
younger people for for dying from the
disease, right? So that key
epidemiological fact was known I'd say
by January 2020. And so um I mean I
would have thought I fully expected two
things to happen almost immediately say
March April 2020. Um one was that we
would do a much better job uh protecting
vulnerable older people and conveying to
the public at large the the the absolute
necessity of doing that. Uh for instance
not sending COVID infected patients into
nursing homes, right? Um and then the
second problem was uh a sort of lack of
urgency on the part of public health
authorities uh to develop scientific
evidence to clear up uncertainties. Um
so I I wrote a study very early on in
the pandemic in April of 2020 estimating
how many people in in Santa CL County
where I used to live um had been
infected and it was like 3% of the
population in early April 2020. Uh that
is not doesn't sound like a lot but it's
like for every infected person who was a
case that had been identified as having
had the disease there were 50 people
walking around with antibodies. Um I did
a replication study in LA County uh a
couple weeks later same result. Um and
then dozens and dozens of studies all
around the world including at the NIH um
found this very very similar result like
that there was that the disease has
spread much more widely than people had
thought. This is how naive I was Ross. I
I thought that that result would change
everybody's mind about how to manage the
pandemic. It's a disease that's
obviously spread much more widely than
people realized despite I mean I call
them draconian measures to try to keep
the spread down. Um that means the
infection fatality rate on average for
the whole population was much lower than
we thought. I would have thought that
would have changed our approach [snorts]
but that didn't happen. Instead, I faced
essentially attacks on my character, uh,
an attempt to destroy my my career, uh,
sort of questions about about like the
integrity of my work that were
completely speirious.
>> What for what form did those attacks
take?
>> Like I mean at the university, there
were, you know, uh, uh, like an
investigation into the study, funding of
this, all of all of which had had been
cleared up before the study was even
done. Um, so it was all it was entirely
spirious. Uh, there uh at at the NIH,
the former head of the NIH wrote an
email to to Tony Fouchy in October 2020
calling me a fringe epidemiologist. I
love that term, by the way. It's a
fantastic I'm going to go to my
hopefully in my grave. Um, the whole
thing was absolutely extraordinary,
right? You what what what was needed was
an honest scientific debate, which I
might have been wrong. I mean, look,
let's have a scientific debate and
discussion. Let's have alternate voices.
But instead the ethos of public health
was that just having the debate at all
was a dangerous thing. Uh that's if you
want to ask me you started with what
went wrong. That is the fundamental
thing that went wrong.
>> Like what what is your what is your
diagnosis of why
>> there was such a closing of ranks.
>> I I mean I Okay. So
I think there's two levels to this. All
right. So f first of all I think um I
mean this is analogy to this like you're
when you're a thirdy year medical
student. I was in medical school once.
Um, uh, you you are that's the first
time you see patients. You put on a
white coat and my god, the effect that
putting on a white coat has on a on on
on like the the desire for the patients
to tell you stuff. Uh, they'll just tell
people tell you everything about their
lives. They have problems that they want
you to solve, right? And the the
instinct that you have with the white
coat on, you're 24 years old, 25 years
old, is to say is to like answer their
questions even when you don't know the
answer. All of public health found
itself in that position. They're facing
a an uncertain threat that they don't
there's no real science yet about it
because it's a brand new disease. The
entirety of society is looking at them
saying, "What should we do about this?
What's the wise right thing to do about
this?" and you don't know the answer.
And as a med student, you have to learn
to say, "I don't know. I'll I'll go look
up the I'll go look up the answer. I'll
go ask uh uh you know, authorities,
people, you know, the other people. I'll
get back to you. Make a plan." But built
around the central fact that you don't
know the answer in the moment that you
have to learn to say that. It's not an
easy instinct. Um and and public health
failed at that at at large, right? Um so
they looked to leaders
leaders like Tony Fouchy and others to
guide them on what to say in that in
that setting and those leaders also
failed at that. The second element is
what happened um to potentially cause
the pandemic. Right? I I I believe uh
and I think a lot of scientists agree
with me that the the best available
evidence suggests that the pandemic was
the result of a lab accident that
happened in Wuhan, China. A lab
>> what what percentage odds of that being
true would
>> my view it's it's it's pretty close to
certain but uh I mean again scientists
disagree with me on this. I don't want
to.
>> Well, and we don't have I mean we don't
have sort of the smoking gun in terms of
the minutes of the Communist Party
meeting where they acknowledge it's a
lab leak or something like that, right?
So, it is
>> as much a scientific debate still as a
kind of intelligence community.
>> I think I mean I think if you just focus
on the scientific evidence alone, I
wouldn't say it's certain. I'd say it's
again there's legitimate excellent
scientists that don't think it was a was
oblique, right? So, um I tend to be on
the side of the scientists that think
that it's uh that it was lab leak based
on other things that there was a whole
effort
uh by the by the scientific community by
the NIH the the Chinese scient
scientific groups and European groups
essentially to prevent all pandemics.
the the research program was you go into
the wild places,
find viruses in those wild places,
>> right? Find the bats,
>> find the bats, uh, and
>> find the pengalin.
>> Now, there's trillion or more viruses
out there,
most of which do not infect have any
chance of infecting humans, but you
don't know. So, you don't know which of
those viruses you're pulling out of the
wild places into a lab are likely to
jump into humans. And so the argument
was in this 200 let's say 2003 to 2020
20ome era is that we have to uh man
manipulate those viruses make them
potentially more dangerous and more
infectious to humans in order to triage
and identify the viruses and pathogens
that are closer to making the leap into
humans um in in some evolutionary sense
and then um uh prepare countermeasures.
This is what so-called gain of function
research is trying to do. It's trying to
essentially hype up multiple viruses and
the ones that become the most deadly are
the ones you try and treat. Yes, that's
>> in advance of it ever infecting a human
being. Right. The utopian promise was we
are going to prevent the world from ever
having to suffer from a a virus making
the leap from natural location into
humans ever again. That was the utopian
vision. Obviously there's problems with
the vision but like the counter measures
that you develop for those pathogens
in the lab that you've never made the
leap into humans will obviously never
have been tested in humans like the
vaccines you develop because no human
has ever been infected by that lab by
that that
>> so you'll have a set of vaccines whose
efficacy is hypothetical
>> right or or it could be other counter
measures but let's say vaccines
>> so this so this but so part of the
scientific establishment was committed
to this project
>> including including the NIH
>> including the NIH and there was at the
very least a good chance that that led
to CO 19 and the pandemic. Why then do
you think that overcommitted the
establishment to school closures, mask
mandates and everything else? What is
what is the link there?
>> Okay, so what what if you open Pandora's
box?
What would you do? You've unleashed hell
on the world and you've done it. You're
responsible for it. What would you do?
>> Go to confession. [laughter]
>> I mean, you're okay. So, what would you
what would you do? Or what would they
what did they do?
>> I don't know. I mean, I God willing, I
never have to be in that position, but
like it is it's just a very just think
about that. Like, I'm going to try to
shut it
>> shut it down.
>> Shut with with whatever means I can at
my at my fingertips to like try to to
make that happen. And if you're uh you
know, powerful people in public health
have a lot of means. as it turns out we
learned in 2020 to to try to do that.
But are they are you saying they tried
to shut down knowledge and debate about
the origins or are you saying that the
attempts to crush co itself through
lockdowns and so on were a kind of
expression of guilt I have to be able to
crush this disease because I myself
released it I'm saying both right so so
imagine that you've done this that
you've you've recommended the lockdowns
you've recommended school closures
you've recommended a set of measures
that you know are going to harm the poor
you know are going to harm the children
but you're doing it because you want to
suppress the spread of this deadly
disease that in in the back of your mind
maybe you think you you might have been
responsible for. Maybe you can't admit
that to yourself. Um you do it and it
doesn't work. It doesn't work. It's
summer of 2020 and it's very very clear
that the disease is still there. You
haven't achieved what the Chinese claim
that they got rid of the disease, but
that's that result is not replicated
anywhere on Earth other than there.
Right? That's and and so you're like
what well what went wrong? We just
didn't do it hard enough. And the
problem is like a lot of people have
been hurt. There are science people in
scientific community pesky fringe
epidemiologists that are saying look
this is a really bad idea. Um and you
can't get the political will to do this
unless for something so extraordinary
you need absolute unonyimity in the
scientific community. If there's debate
it's not going to happen. You're not
going to have another lockdown.
And so what you do is you suppress
speech, you suppress dissent, and you
make sure that anyone who uh dissents
that their their reputation is destroyed
so that that other people won't speak
up.
So we don't have Anthony Fouchy here to
argue with you. But let let me try and
offer a couple arguments to you for
what you could imagine people in his
position were thinking. Right? So first
argument would be okay co 19 did not
have a 5% mortality rate. It was not
particularly dangerous to children.
Thank God. It did have a much higher
mortality rate, you would agree, than
any sort of seasonal flu that we have
encountered in
>> there. Still some arguments over that,
but but yes, I'll grant that. Yes,
>> you grant you'd grant that. Okay. Um,
and it has Yeah, it has sort of profound
profound
>> 1918 flu is really bad. I mean,
>> not the right since the 1918 flu means
that
>> um
and it has a it is profoundly risky for
older Americans, senior citizens, and so
on, right?
It might be that it's just really hard
in a big diverse fluid society to design
a set of policies that sort of separate
off old people from the rest of society.
Maybe you can do that in to some degree
with nursing homes, but most old people,
we have a lot of old people in America.
They are embedded in communities, towns,
cities, families. uh they too want to go
to Thanksgiving dinner, everything else.
Right. And you you've already mentioned
briefly the Great Bington Declaration
and um a document that you and other
fringe epidemiologists, right, put out
arguing for essentially a strategy that
tried to bring back normal life while
protecting the elderly. Isn't that
really hard to do?
>> Yes, it's really hard to do. So how how
would you have done it as against a
strategy that basically said to protect
the elderly we have to limit circulation
in the general population? Um first I
wouldn't recommended sending co infected
patients back to nursing like so I mean
let's just establish that the early
months of the pandemic frankly terrible
mistakes were made but once you are four
to six months
>> the question is why were they made like
it was the wrong goal there were
measures that could have been taken very
quickly that could have could have
helped right so for instance one of the
there was a paper published in the
proceedings of national academy of
sciences finding that um Part of the way
that nursing homes uh uh disease spread
happened in 2020 was that you had the
same people working in multiple nursing
homes and so they go from they track the
disease from one to the other. You could
have you could have like restructured
nursing home staffing so that you only
had to you know you only worked in one
nursing home [gasps]
less less movement for the workers in
and out. Um I mean there were there were
a whole host of things we put in the
great parenting declaration with the
hope that local public health would
embrace this challenge
>> right
>> we in my view we didn't try it try it at
all sufficiently in fact the criticism I
got one of the criticisms I got for the
great Branson declaration um was that we
were already doing this we're doing
everything we could already to protect
old people was self-evidently not true
even in October 2020
>> isn't there though at some level a
trade-off where people in charge of
public health in the United States could
look at the period 2020 2021 and they
could say number one we did not do the
kind of draconian lockdowns right that
parts of Western Europe, Australia,
other places did parts of the US opened
up. We did have a certain kind of COVID
federalism right that that that was
real. Um second we did eventually get a
vaccine. It arrived sooner than a lot of
people had expected and at that point a
lot of old people got the vaccine and
became more likely to survive COVID.
Would you agree with that?
>> Yeah.
>> Right. So then the narrative, the sort
of official public health narrative
becomes this was an imperfect policy. We
went too far. We closed schools for too
long maybe, but we also probably kept a
bunch of old people alive until the
vaccine arrived. and the, you know, more
open approach might have been better for
some people, but also might have cost
more lives, right?
>> I don't think it would have cost more
lives. I think ultimately the lockdowns
ended up killing more people than than
um than uh um would have been killed had
that those lockdowns not happened.
>> Well, just just to clarify what you mean
through missed cancer screenings,
through secondary what what is the
mechanis?
>> Yeah. Exa Exactly. like you know people
died at home with heart attacks uh in
2020 because they didn't go to the
hospital. Also more broadly the economic
dislocations caused by the lockdowns
certainly killed vast numbers of people.
I think the fundamental error is people
think that well if we'd only the
lockdowns
sort of worked. I guess the fundamental
I think in the in the in the sort of
>> just in the sense of pushing pushing
some potential deaths into the future
past the point where we got the vaccine
that seems to me to be the strongest
case.
>> Yeah, that's so that's the argument,
right? But I I'd say a couple things
about that. So one um we didn't know
vaccine was going to work,
>> right?
>> That was that was not a certainty.
the uh idea that when there's this kind
of uncertainty, you must do this
extraordinary
sort of measure where you draconian
measure you take away basic civil
liberties at scale for 9 months like
however long until you get the vaccine
that I think is the end of civilization.
Like if that is our paradigm for for
managing these kinds of risks, we can't
have a we can't have at least a
pre-ivilization. Um because you you you
you can't make plan. You can't take you
can't you don't know if your kids are
going to be able to go to school. You
don't know you don't you can't make
basic plans. If all of the basic
promises that we have about our civil
liberties are premised on there not
being
>> uncertainty over the spread of
infectious disease then you just don't
you just don't have a free free country.
>> You know you were a skeptic and a critic
of the public health response. There
were a lot of different kinds of
skeptics and critics of the public
health response right. Um, there were
people who agreed with you that, you
know, the death toll wasn't going to be
5%. And there were people who said it's
no worse than the flu, it's hyped, it's
a total myth. There were people who
said, um, you know, that it was a
planned a planned pandemic designed by,
you know, evil global authorities to
call the population, right? And then
once we had a vaccine, there were
critics of how the vaccine was promoted
who said, "Well, we shouldn't be
mandating it and we've oversold its
benefits." And I think those critiques
are correct. And then there were people
who said, "This vaccine doesn't work at
all and it's going to kill millions of
people itself." Which I assume you would
agree that's incorrect.
>> I agree that's incorrect. Yeah. So part
of what happened with public health
authorities, right, is that they were
concerned about the wilder, crazier
sort of outsider narratives. And I think
there's a a question here that I wrestle
with a lot, which is once you yourself
are a kind of outsider critic, right?
How do you maintain
your own equilibrium and not get pulled
into
the wilder world of conspiracy theories?
Because that happens to a lot of people.
They start out with a reasonable
critique of an establishment. They
discover something the authorities have
gotten wrong and then they move from
that to a worldview where the
authorities are always wrong about
everything.
>> Okay. So, uh let me ask the immediate
question then then the broader question.
And so the immediate question is like
how do I how do I personally I mean I I
do my very best to be grounded by the
data that the and and I and I read
pretty broadly including people that I
disagree with. And um I I have always
had as a scientist this idea that the
best way for me to always be right is is
when I'm wrong to change my mind.
[gasps]
Like you have to have this sort of
epistemic humility in the face of very
complicated questions or you're you're
going to be wrong. I've never met a
scient an excellent scientist who didn't
believe they were wrong all the time
because they're just complicated
questions and you don't know the answer.
You have a hypothesis. The data you you
you develop don't don't match the
hypothesis. You have to be open to the
possibility of changing hypothesis.
Right? just I think that that kind of
scientific training and especially the
epistemic humility around that
scientific training um has helped me a
ton on that and it's and it's hard
because you uh get enamored with your
own ideas very very easily
>> uh especially if you've invested a lot
in them. Now let me now answer the
broader thing the broader question about
like the the responsibility of
scientific leaders
>> um because that's really what your
question is about right. Yes. Um I don't
believe that you can control a
conversation in the direction you want
by suppressing people's ideas
fundamentally right the I believe I mean
I really do believe in the religion of
free speech especially for science is
important
and that means that you have to tolerate
even wild opinions that you
fundamentally disagree with because who
knows maybe they're right and there's a
second secondary effect to this if you
start to suppress those ideas and that's
what happened during the Biden
administration. They systematically used
the power of government to suppress
those that that speech online um
>> through pressure on social media
companies.
>> Exactly. But if you focus attention, if
you do that kind of suppression, it's
not as if you actually suppress the idea
really right that that idea still is in
existence in populations. there are
other people thinking it and when you
the very act of suppression actually
elevates it in the public in the public
eye um rather than allowing to just sort
of burble up and have the normal kind of
debate that you you you would expect.
>> But don't public health authorities at
some level have to take their own side
in the argument?
>> They're very good at taking their own
side.
>> Well, but no, but now you're a public
health authority. So this is this is a
question about and about how really
everyone involved in Trump
administration public health sort of
approaches their job right so let's take
take the COVID vaccine right I think
again it's fair to say that the
>> efficacy of the COVID vaccine the need
to make it universal the need to mandate
it was dramatically oversold by the
Biden administration and by public
health officials and this created a lot
of suspicion and paranoia around the
vaccine
At the same time, my own reading of the
evidence is that the vaccine was very
good for older people and it was good
that lots of older people took it and it
would have been better if more older
people took it. And do you think that
that is a perspective that you know
public health authorities should be
salesmen for? Should it be possible to
say yes, you know, we're not suppressing
speech, we're not suppressing vaccine
critics, but we are going to sell this
vaccine to 57y old Americans if it seems
to work for them.
>> Yeah. So, in October 2020 when we wrote
the the Great Bington Declaration, if
you go read it, we actually have
vaccines as a one of the mechanisms of
focus protection. Again, I had this
naive view. You have this counter
measure. You use it to protect older
people and then you lift lockdowns.
But that wasn't what public health
authorities actually said at the time.
You can I can show you examples
essentially of promising zero COVID. If
only we can get the entire population
>> or some some some version of this to to
to take it.
>> Um that was the problem. It wasn't that
they weren't saying what they believed.
is that what they were saying was false
given what the data actually showed,
right? And they should have known it at
the time. Um, what happened instead was
you have the public health authorities
doubling down on falsehoods.
>> If you don't if you don't take the
vaccine, you are a committing a social
evil. Um, you're unclean.
And and that message then is met by a
whole bunch of people like, look, you're
just you're just wrong. But but if that
is the sin, I'm just curious how you
think we get out of the trap where the
sin of the public health authorities
leads to this larger discrediting which
leads to people for understandable
reasons having their own set of false
>> beliefs. I I I just want to make sure
people people understand like I I don't
want the public health authorities to be
discredited permanently. I want reform
of the public health authorities to be
worth so that they become worthy of
trust
and I've appointed to I think it was
like a Pew poll in 2024 that uh 25% of
of of Americans have don't believe that
scientists have the best interest of the
public at heart. One in four. And then
people will come back to me scientists
come well look 75% trust us.
That's too low a bar, Ross. We It needs
to be 100. Like we It's not politics
where like if I get 50 plus one, I've
succeeded. If I'm at 75% of our
scientific work uh like where the public
thinks that only 75% of the public
thinks that that the work that the NIH
does benefits them, it's an utter
failure.
>> Okay. So, you are in charge of the NIH.
The the NIH is obviously in charge of
scientific research, funding scientific
research, right? which is
>> a distinct in some ways from some of the
kind of public health interventions that
we've been talking about. But what does
what does a reform agenda at the NIH
look like? What are you what are you
actually trying to do?
>> Right. So, um uh three big things. Uh
and they're all designed aimed at uh
establishing a trustworthy scientific
establishment in the United States for
biome medicine. I'm going to step back.
The mission of the NIH is that we do
research that advances the health and
longevity of people, specifically
American people. If we achieve that
mission, we've gone a long way to
achieving trust. Um, and if you look at
the last 15 years from 2010 to now, life
expectancy has been flat. There's a
collapse that lasted almost 3 or 4
years. Uh, and 2024 is I think we have
roughly we've
>> it's just started growing again.
>> It's just back to where it was in 2019,
which was roughly where it was in 2010.
all these amazing advances in science
which I just marvel at. You know, cure a
cure for cickle cell anemia which I
would have thought was science fiction
if you told me in med school in the mid
90s. Um all of these like huge advances
and yet American health has not really
in by the most basic measure improved
since 2010. And the way to solve that
problem is the NIH like the NIHS has the
capacity to solve it like f it's that's
a complicated and diverse set of things
like but but like one of the things is
um address the barriers that make those
those um those advances available for
the for the American people right I just
mentioned cickle cell anemia right so
let's invest in re it's cost $3 million
for treatment [sighs]
if it cost $30,000 there would be no
more cickle cell anemia in the United
States if it cost $300 no more single
cell anemia on earth.
>> So that means that you're trying
effectively to do
research into the cost structure,
>> research in technologies that reduce the
the the price of or the cost the
>> cost of things where we've already had
breakthroughs and is do you feel like
the NIH has not been doing enough
research into sort of cost issues as
opposed to discovery issues?
>> Yeah. Well, I mean I I guess what you
mean by cost issues like investments in
in research that would reduce cost of
>> I'm trying I'm trying to figure out what
you think is
>> wrong with the existing system. The
answer is that is yes.
>> Uh and then I'll give you another
example. Uh the NIH has some investments
in repurposing of drugs but not
sufficient level of investment. Um I'll
give you an example of where I think
this is a very promising thing. Right?
So, a colleague of mine at Stanford
found that that uh the old Zostavax
vaccine for shingles reduces the
progression into Alzheimer's disease for
a drug that's basically free and very
well tolerated. He's had a lot before
this he's had a lot of trouble getting
resources to run a large randomized
trial to convince the world that Israel
is true. It's something that I should
invest in. Right? Those kinds of drug
repurposing possibilities I think are a
really really important potential tool
for addressing the health problems of
the country while simultaneously doing
it in a way that doesn't break the bank.
>> So in in terms of like the practical
side of medical bureaucracy, what orders
do you give to NIH bureaucrats to make
people interested in someone doing
research in um you know off label drugs
or something? the biggest power really
is to like point to a problem that and
get everyone to agree that it is a
problem uh and then inspire people to
like bring their ingenuity to solve the
problem. I can put out guide notices,
priority statements that say, "Look,
this is a priority for the NIH." And if
I and if I'm sufficiently convincing
that this should be a priority, that
they I can get the various institute
directors to and scientific directors,
many many brilliant people all across
the NIH to agree that this should be a
priority, then they'll then they'll
start to make decisions about the gr
their grant portfolios to align with
that. Um I one thing I've done I think
is a really uh sort of uh important
change is I've given the scientific uh
directors of the NIH um more leeway in
in crafting their portfolios to meet the
strategic aims of the of the institutes
and of the country. Um uh in the old
days of how the NIH many parts of the
NIH decided what grants to fund you have
the scientific review. So like you have
100,000 applications, tens of thousands
of scientists around the country sit
around the table deciding what to score
each application. Um the scoring and I
sat on scientific reviews for decades
before I became an ICE director. It
really strongly emphasized the methods
like they would tend to score highly
projects that that looked like they were
likely to work but underemphasized
innovation. Right? I I saw so many grant
proposals where new ideas I didn't know
if they would work or not would get
killed by the by the group because they
didn't know it would work. I've given
the folks who run the the institutes now
the capacity to craft a portfolio uh
where they take innovative ideas with
the goal of I don't I'm not going to
judge them if like say you have
portfolio 50 projects 49 of them fail
and the 50th cure is type two diabetes
I'm going to view that as a successful
portfolio. I that's that's the that's
the freedom I've given them. Let's use
diabetes as a bridge to chronic illness
because this is something obviously that
RFK Jr., the head of HHS has emphasized,
right? Um I have a personal interest in
in chronic illness as as someone who has
had uh interesting long-standing
encounter with the highly contested
chronic form of Lyme disease. When you
talk about when you know the Trump
administration or you know talks about
chronic illness as a category, what kind
of illnesses are you talking about? What
is the range?
>> I mean, there's of course there's
there's like the the chronic illnesses
like type two diabetes and uh obesity if
you want to call it a chronic ill,
certainly a chronic condition that that
that can have all kinds of effects that
that that make people's lives worse. Um
but also I'd like take chronic lime,
right? That I think um we've
underinvested frankly in the science in
in in ways that that that could could
actually, you know, help patients get
good answers. um you go to the doctor
and the doctor doesn't know what to say
because the science isn't there and they
just don't believe you.
>> I mean, one thing that was startling to
me was realizing that there's a certain
number of conditions where they there's
a label that just describes symptoms. It
doesn't describe origin or, you know, a
theory of what's causing it, right? So,
if someone tells you you have chronic
fatigue syndrome, they're not like, "Oh,
and we know you know what causes this
and and here's a treatment." It's just
like no this is this is a label that we
put on a certain set of symptoms that
that we don't that we don't fully
understand
>> and then and then the next step from
that is uh to because I don't know a
physical thing that causes it
>> then therefore it must be psychological
and so patients leave the doctor
thinking that the doctor thinks they're
crazy.
>> What do you think are the most plausible
lines of research here? When I listen to
um Secretary Kennedy, I think he places
a really strong emphasis on pre-existing
health of the patient and maybe it's
connected to obesity, it's connected to
diet, it's connected to exercise. You
need to sort of fix the terrain of the
patient in order to bring them back to
health. Um in my own experience, I did
not like find a dietary solution to Lyme
disease. I took insane levels of
antibiotics for a very long period of
time, treated it basically as an active
infection
>> and and that was in the end successful
in terms of getting the condition under
control. So I have a bias towards the
idea that a lot of chronic illnesses
might have sort of a direct cure.
Anyway, I'm just I'm just curious where
you think the most promising lines of
research are.
>> It's it's going to be heterogeneous. I
mean I like there's no one answer to
that because the the the kinds of
diseases or conditions we're talking
about are so varied. Even even chronic
lime is a good example of this. Like
there are there are patients who have
had exactly the story you've told and
then there are patients who've had long
uh bouts of antibiotics to like to try
to address and they don't they still
have the the same chronic lime sentence.
Same thing with autism. It's
characterizing that is a scientific
question. A lot of of the problems are
that people have their their sense of
like what works and what worked for them
that doesn't necessarily generalize
over. And that to me that the
>> it's really I should say it's really
hard for me and again this is my my
sympathy for the skeptics of chronic
lime. It's really hard for me to look at
my own experience and come up with a
randomized control trial set of
experiments. It's like, oh, we're going
to randomize control trial someone
taking six different antibiotics for 4
and a half years, right? That that's
that seems it seems like there are areas
where there's just some sort of
limitations on what scientific research
can do with some of these conditions.
>> I I mean, I guess I'm an optimist about
that. I am really high on the uh the
ability of the scientific method applied
honestly where I don't think you're
crazy just because you say you have a
condition that I don't understand um to
lead to to improvements in treatment and
prevention and things like that. I I
this is like autism. Let's just be like
be specific, right? I I um worked very
early on when I became an action
director on this autism data science
initiative and I explicitly in the call
for proposal said I don't know what the
answer is. I don't know what the
ideology of autism is and so I want a
wide range of of hypotheses to be
tested. So I mean I just I just this is
why I I want to emphasize I don't know
the answer and I want to let all of
these hypothesis have a have their have
people with their with make their case
using data. uh that's the that's how
science advances when we don't know.
>> So along with chronic diseases, another
issue that you've been very focused on
at least in public commentary is the
replication crisis. I think probably a
lot of listeners don't know what the
replication crisis is. So tell me what
it is and what you can do about it.
Okay, so this will come as a shock to
folks who haven't heard about this, but
uh it turns out that uh a some chunk
maybe a large chunk there's a lot of
debate about exactly how much of the
scient published peer-reviewed
scientific literature even in top
journals
when independent research teams look and
try to answer the same question do not
find the same answer. That is a large
chunk of the scientific literature is
not reliable. And this happens in field
after field after field. Neurosciences
in cancer biology and psychology. As a
result, uh drug manufactur drug drug
developers actually they do their own
private replication efforts because they
don't trust the literature.
This is a disaster.
Disaster for everybody.
>> But what do you do about it? You can't
go around paying for the replication of
you
>> hundreds of thousands of scientific
papers.
>> Okay. You can't you can't You're
absolutely right. You can't replicate
every single paper. It's hundreds of
thousands of millions of ideas, right?
And I also don't want the the the the
government to decide which ideas ought
to be replicated. It I mean that I
frankly as a conservative that makes me
really queasy. Um what you have to do is
you have to crowdsource have the
scientific community identify what are
the the key ideas that need replication.
If they turn out to be true then then uh
they would send science one way. If it
turn out to be false it would send
science another way. Right. Um and and
then you uh you do that by essentially
the using the NIH the normal process of
the NIH uh seek grants applications from
the scientific community uh to do to do
replication and that that has a big
effect on essentially creating a a cadre
of researchers who
are honored by the scientific community
because if I give them NIH grants then
that that's the sort of the a marker of
scientific success. right now. That's
really hard to do. If you are great at
replication work, it's really hard to
make a career out of it.
>> It's an unsexy thing to say that I'm a
replicator.
>> Actually, can I say it another way? It's
a second scientific revolution. The
first scientific revolution was
authority deciding what's true or false.
And uh the revolution was a guy with a
telescope gets to decide what's true or
false in physical reality.
Replication then is essentially
democratization of who gets to decide
what's true and false in science. The
replicator then is not just some unsexy
thing. It's like fundamental to decide
to for the for the scientific community
deciding what's true or false. That's
that's the second scientific revolution.
>> Is that something the NIH is capable of
doing?
>> Yes, we're going to do that.
>> Okay.
>> Um and people ask me what percentage.
I'm not I don't know. It'll depend on
the field. It'll depend on a whole whole
host of things. And I'm going to let the
scientific community uh weigh in on
that. Um then second, you have a journal
where you can actually publish your
replication work.
Also, your negative findings. Like I
have a drawer full of of hypotheses that
failed.
You should be able to publish them, put
them in in a j in a journal somewhere,
right? So uh again that's something can
do.
>> Journal journal of of failed of failed
results.
>> You won't call it that. I'm really bad
at marketing, but maybe
>> No, I think you're I think second
scientific revolution. That was that was
good marketing. I'm on board.
>> Okay. And then third, you make a set of
metrics that track good scientific
behavior. Right? If you are if someone
comes to you and says, "Oh, Ross, I'm
going to try to replicate your paper."
You're going to view it as a threat
because the culture is wrong. If someone
comes to a scientist and says, "Oh, I
want to replicate your paper or your
idea." That is actually an honor. and we
can put metrics around that uh so that
people at the scientist level get credit
for that. Um I think the the NIH can and
and under my leadership we're working to
try to do all three of those things.
>> All right. I'm going to push us from
reforms into political controversy. And
starting with something that you just
said a few moments ago which I thought
was really interesting that basically if
you have a world where 75% of the public
trusts scientific authorities and 25% of
the public doesn't it's 25% too many. I
think very clearly there's a big
percentage more than 25% of the country
that doesn't trust anything that is
associated with the Trump administration
generally and is very skeptical of
public health efforts specifically.
Right? So that is your that is your
problem. Right? That is that is the
percentage of people you need to win
over. Um and I just want to go through
three areas of controversy and see what
what you have to say about them. um
start with diversity, equity, and
inclusion as something that became a
really big factor in scientific
research, grant making proposals and so
on. Um this has been something that you
have pushed hard against. So tell me why
>> and then I'll ask you a follow-up.
>> Okay. The primary reason why there's
there's many wise, but I think for me
the most important reason why is that
that research has not improved the
health of minority populations,
right? minority populations have had
flatline life expectancy. They have they
continue to have very very high rates of
chronic disease. Uh and none of that
research has made any difference
whatsoever in addressing those health
needs. Um and and I think
>> what kind of research are you talking
about?
>> I'm talking about just give me I'm not
going to give like a particular person's
thing. I'll just give you a prototypical
kind of example.
I a paper that says that uh uh you know
uh structural racism is the reason why
there's uh African-Americans have higher
deaths rates from from heart attacks.
All right, that that might that's a
hypothesis one might have.
>> The reason why that does not actually
translate to a better health for for
African-Americans is because it's not
science.
[gasps]
Think about the word structural racism.
The idea of structural racism, right?
That that means that it's pervasive.
That's the hypothesis that every aspect
of society is is affected by this sort
of uh this sort of like animist that
people have against African-Americans,
right? Um and that if every aspect of
society is corrupted by this, including
the medical care systems, then how can
you have a control group in testing the
hypothesis? You in principle couldn't
construct a control group. [sighs] Um uh
so that that kind of work has literally
no chance of actually translating over
to better treatments, better cures,
better better ways of managing disease,
um better ways to prevent disease for uh
for minority populations because it's
bad science. Not even science at all,
I'd say. Um second, I'd say it presumes
an answer even before you have test done
any testing of it. uh and because it
presumes an answer it's it it's it
essentially corrupts the scientific
process. And third, finally, what action
could you take on response to suppose
you believe it's true, right? What
action in the within the context of
what's actually possible in the
healthare systems or whatever could you
actually take to address it.
>> But that is different from for instance
research that is focused on diseases
that disproportionately affect minority
population or
>> Yeah. Or just to take an example again
from my own experience, my wife wrote a
book on the science of you know the
maternal transformation, right? And
something that became very clear in her
research was that you know there's just
been far more research on the male body
as like the sort of fundamental form of
humanity than the female body. Right?
But that means then if you were trying
to correct that, you would essentially
be funding more research into women
reproduction, pregnancy. I mean I mean I
am fully in favor of research that
improves the health of everybody
minority populations women and it is
absolutely true that there are like I
think there's been underinvestment for
instance in research on menopause right
uh there's underinvestment on on a whole
host of things that could translate over
to better health for uh for for people
in especially minorities who do have
higher rates of chronic disease and a
whole host of other conditions that need
to get addressed. My beef with DEI is
that it does not actually address those
needs and in fact it diverts attention
away from the kinds of investments that
would would address those needs. Right.
But but I guess yeah I guess that's sort
of a useful question though like if
because there have been reports in the
Trump administration if it's like you
know people are going through grants and
just striking out particular words and
phrases and so on right is there
>> I put a I put up I I sent an email to
all the NIH that I do not believe in ban
word list because that that's you know
the word equity shows up in many
different contexts
>> right so it's just it's not it's it's
it's crazy to use a ban word list and we
and I I told and I I can look my emails
and in my director statements, no ban
word lists. Okay.
>> Um but instead to assess because like
let's say one a new grant proposal comes
in establishing trying to establish the
difference in prevalence in hypertension
between between for African-Americans
and whites. That's is an old idea that
has already been replicated a million
times. There's no reason for us to fund
that. a a proposal comes in that's that
uh a new way of addressing hypertension
uh that doesn't require you to take a
pill every day but is more effective,
cheaper. Well, that will have a a huge
benefit for the health of
African-Americans. I what I want is
improvements in the health of
African-Americans, improvements in the
health of white Americans, improvement
the health of every American. Uh and
research that advances the health of
people is really what I care about. It's
like putting an equity lens around that
essentially um uh undermines the the the
real thing we care about which is
improved health. Next area of
controversy, vaccines. Again, you are a
face of public health in the Trump era.
American vaccine uptake is declining.
Trust in vaccines is declining. You have
outbreaks of measles and whooping cough
and other diseases that vaccines are
supposed to conquer. What do you think
is the Trump administration public
health strategy around vaccines if you
were to describe it generally?
>> Broadly, it's trying to to um uh solve
that trust problem. That's the central
pillar. Um and you have to try to
understand, I think, what the what what
what has led to the position we're in.
And we talked so much about COVID. I
think that that you can't think about
why there's this lack of trust in some
vaccines without understanding the
failure of public health on the COVID
vaccine.
I I think it's spilled over and and it's
extremely distressing to me like to
watch this because I think the MMR
vaccine for instance is a tremendously
important vaccine. The best way to
prevent measles which is a preventable
illness that that kills can kill kids,
right? Uh I think the uptake now is like
92% and which is too low. the 90
>> and it's lower in rural counties, it's
lower in some immigrant communities.
It's it's there's a bunch of different
zones, some red states, some blue state.
Yes. But go on.
>> Uh one of the major root problems is the
decline in trust in vac in in in in
those kinds of basic traditional
vaccines that are vital to the health of
children and for many and also some
adults. And so the the Trump
administration policy as far as I
understand it is and as far as I've
advocate advocated is to take actions to
address that distrust.
That's that's the core philosophical
underpinning for the actions that we've
taken,
>> right?
>> Um and now there's a tremendous amount
of controversy within the public health
community about how to restore that
trust. And let me just characterize it
in two basic camps.
One camp says, "Well, the problem is
misinformation. You have a lot of people
going around saying crazy things about
vaccines and we just need to like um
suppress them from from having their
their their way and their say, right? Uh
the other camp which I'm much closer to
is that we actually have to take actions
that demonstrate the kind of epistemic
humility we were talking about before in
the in the context of trying to show
people the evidence. For instance, the
measles vaccines. If parents are
listening, I would very very strongly
recommend that you have your child
vaccinated with the measles vaccines,
the polio vaccines, the uh the DPT, all
these all these all these childhood
vaccines that are on now. Um recently we
took an action of of uh distinguishing
vaccines on the childhood schedules that
are uh common all through the rest of
the world from vaccines on the childhood
schedules are not common all through the
rest of the world. like the take the
Danes like the Danish vaccine schedule
is really widely trusted in Denmark then
you can say to the American public look
uh world public health agrees with this
places where public health is much more
widely trusted agrees with this the idea
then is to is to instill confidence that
the set of it's a narrower set of
vaccines that are that are focused on
but the set of vaccines that are
tremendously important to the health of
the kids um I want the uptake of those
vaccines to go up um it's it's a it's a
different approach than the the sort of
like traditional public health approach
which is to say you're wrong go away
>> but some people are wrong right
>> yes
>> I mean I I don't I don't think I don't
find the language of misinformation
helpful I do think there are people who
who misinform people but in my
experience and I've had a lot of it in
sort of the weird r the weird zones of
sort of beliefs about health in America
people who have wild ideas or paranoid
ideas tend to be very very sincere about
them. And so I agree with you, there's a
lot to be said for trying to engage with
sincere people. At the same time, there
are a bunch of ideas about vaccines that
are just false. Yeah. Right. And it
seems to me that part of what the Trump
administration has done is sort of bring
inside its tent in terms of sort of
appointments and people whose ideas I
would say are probably just wrong.
Right. And I don't know if you would
agree with that, but it seems like
there's it seems like there's a risk an
obvious risk there. Right. Can I just
can I just point out so so I I I think I
would agree with that but it's not
unique to the Trump administration.
Tremendous parts of public health people
inside the tent in public health during
the Biden administration were deeply
wrong about so many things in public
health related directly to public health
right so it's not it's it's normal but
no one in the Biden administration
started out and said I think this person
is wrong but nonetheless I want to bring
them into the conversation and give them
a platform right they were wrong but
they didn't know Just just so we're
clear about this. So like I I I don't
think anyone does what you just said.
Like I think
people are brought in not because they
people here think they're wrong.
>> Uh I mean I I'm not the one bringing
anybody but but but they add something
to the conversation potentially.
>> Right. And do I think that that some of
those people are wrong? Yeah. I mean I I
do but like that's normal. I normally
think a lot of people in science are
wrong in public health are wrong. Uh so
that's not unique. I think the issue is
um and what's different in the Trump
administration is that we are allowing a
wider range of public debate over these
issues than public health in the United
States is traditionally comfortable
with. That's the that's the crucial
difference. Do you think though that
there is a danger that for every person
who may feel more trust in this and may
be more likely to get at least some
vaccines for their kids, there's someone
else who just feels profoundly validated
in their vaccine skepticism and says,
"Look, even the government of the United
States is, you know, open to my ideas
about vaccines and those ideas are false
and are leading to collapsing vaccine
rates." Like, isn't isn't that a risk?
>> It's it is it certainly is a risk, Ross.
But the risk the other direction is that
we just keep going with the well trust
me I was I'm right I'm I'm like a you
know a high public health official in
the US government and so therefore you
should just do what I say. That approach
I think has already failed. Isn't there
a middle ground again and this is
similar to what I was suggesting with
the COVID vaccine where you say
we have been too high-handed, too
sweeping, we have gotten things wrong,
but nonetheless,
you know, it is our job to
tell you straightforwardly what we think
and not just sort of present a kind of
ongoing debate, right? Isn't there a way
to be humble but also try and tell the
truth, right, as the best you can? I
think I'm trying to do that, Ross. May
maybe I don't know if you agree that
I've succeeded, but like that is my
that's my goal also, right? Um I I I
think the um uh uh the way I would
characterize the vaccine policy that is
that is exactly that, right? So for
instance, I've very very clearly and
straightforwardly said and recommended
that parents vaccinate their kids for
MMR, for polio, for dip, you know, DPT,
uh dtheria, ptasus, tetanus. I've very
clearly and cleanly said that that I
think that the evidence is strong that
you should do that. It's a really for
most for the vast majority of kids
>> probably probably all kids, right? So I,
you know, you heard me say that, right?
Uh
>> do I think that six months old kids
should get the COVID vaccine,
>> right?
>> Most of most kids I think the answer is
no,
>> right? So and yet the CDC up until
Ralph's releasement was recommending
that kids as young as six months olds
get the COVID vaccine.
>> There's room for nuance. There's room
for humility and that is part it's
exactly what we're trying to bring in.
are
>> but is but there is also this is you
know as I look at the secretary of
health and human services and hopefully
someday I can interview him you don't
have to speak for him but he has
obviously a long history of casting
doubt on lots of different vaccines and
you know the sort of enthusiastic case
that you just made for different
vaccines it just doesn't seem like one
he's comfortable making. He's
comfortable saying something positive
about some vaccines, but he's not a he's
not a salesman for vaccines, right?
>> I think I I think we've had enough of
salesman. I I I actually have tremendous
respect for Bobby and um you know, I
don't always necessarily agree with him
uh substantively, but he listens to me
and we he tells me his points of view.
He points me to papers and you know, I
learn from those papers. Like I just
it's hard to like the caricature of him
I've seen in the in the press is just
totally unfair. Like I've seen him
change his mind when I've sent papers to
him or or given him evidence or
reasoning. And I and I think um I I
think that that uh if I had the choice
between, you know, someone like the the
former head of HHS who was not a doctor
either uh and was much more in this sort
of salesman mode, politician salesman
mode or Bobby, I think Bobby will
ultimately be better for American public
health.
>> Would you hope that vaccine uptake rates
would go up in the end? Yes. At the end
of the Trump period. Well, for for the
for the especially for the most
important vaccines. Yes.
>> Okay. All right. Well, we can Well,
that's that's a good metric and uh I'll
be back here in 3 years to to talk it to
talk about it.
>> Last controversy question. Funding.
>> Trump administration, your
administration proposed substantial cuts
to operationalize substantial cuts
through Doge. Um proposed substantial
cuts in its budget. Uh Congress has
resisted some of those cuts. It's an
ongoing debate, but the administration
that you're part of is formally on the
side of spending less money on various
forms of scientific research and public
health. Why? I mean, I'll tell you when
the president asked me to be the NIH
director, the the task that he gave me
was to make sure that the American
biomedical research establishment was
the best in the world. like there's a
real sense inside the Trump
administration of of a tremendous
challenge from from the Chinese
biomedical infrastructure. Um and I mean
that's the task that he gave me right.
uh now Congress and and uh the budget
folks fight over the exact amount of the
budget and my job is to make take the
budget that that the that we get and you
actually I'm actually quite delighted
that Congress voted through the House
just voted through a bill to fund the
NIH at higher levels than it did last
year. high, but again, higher levels
than the White House proposed,
>> higher levels than last year. And my
job, I'm delighted because now
opportunity I I'm delighted that I have
the opportunity to spend the money to
fulfill the task that the president gave
me, which is a task that I fundamentally
believe in. Take that research dollars,
put them to research that improves the
health and longevity of the American
people. Remove politics out of it. No
more DEI.
refocus on uh on on establishing the
rigor and reproducibility of the of the
scientific ideas establish the NIH as
the place where you're looking at
frontier ideas. I mean I it's hard to
help and I think
>> it's not you wouldn't say that it's the
case that the big problem in public
health is just too much wasteful
spending. Well, I think the money spent
on DEI grants was probably wasteful
spending,
>> but that was not that was not the vast
majority of funding for
>> public. I think I think it's a very I
think it's very very productive. I mean,
I think economic uh estimates it's like
somewhere between every dollar invested
by the government produces $2 to5 of
economic growth. I mean I think it's a
really well well I don't think that's
enough though. I I think it actually has
to improve health right. So in in this
in a sense like the last 15 years of
investments because life expectancy
hasn't improved has not been as
productive as it might otherwise be. My
job is to try to make those more more
more more productive. Um and I'm
delighted the opportunity to do that.
>> Okay. Now that I've established your
profound disagreement at least with Elon
Musk and possibly the Office of
Management and Budget
>> and gotten you into deep trouble.
>> I don't think completely. And this this
leads to my final question which I Hold.
Can I just Can I just Can I just I I
mean I think that that uh there's a
legitimate need to address the budget
problems that the United States has
because I share I I I share as I have a
PhD in economics. I share the the sense
that if we do not address this budget
sort of structural budget deficit that
the federal government has, it's an
existential crisis for the United
States. Right? So I completely
understand what what they're trying to
achieve and I share their goal entirely.
uh how it's achieved. I think that's
done in context with working with a
broader set of people including people
in Congress who also who I have a
tremendous respect for. Yeah. Right. So
I you know
>> Yeah. respect all around. Um [laughter]
[snorts] last question which I save for
the end because I am so grateful to you
for coming on this podcast. But it is
also the case that in the public
criticisms of you, one of the critiques
of the Badacharia era at the NIH is, and
I quote, this is from an Atlantic piece
that I'm that was critical, right? Said,
"You're too busy podcasting to do
anything." So, are you too busy
podcasting? Short answer is no. But
because I mean I spend most of my time
at the NIH uh making like all the hard
problems come up to the to me that that
so I spend a lot of time on on the sort
of management challenge of the NIH, a
lot of time at the White House, a lot of
time at HHS, a lot of time in Congress.
That's that's my job like to talk to
people. Um so that that the short answer
is no. But I will say like that
criticism was interesting to me because
it seemed to me like um like the reason
I like podcasts is I can talk to the
American public about what my ideas are
for for things that they presumably care
about. Like they care what the NIH does
because it might produce cures and
treatments, right? So I can communicate
those ideas. It's kind like like the
modern fireside fireside uh chat that
like FDR would have, right? Um, and the
criticism from that that Atlantic
article is trying to get me to like feel
bad about that public communication.
That's my job.
>> I don't think you should feel no one
should feel bad about podcasting is my
personal opinion.
>> No, but but the point is like it's
they're trying to get me to like d think
twice about that doing that kind of
public communication. Uh, in part
because I I think they don't want me to
talking to the public. They're trying to
like use name calling in place of
actually arguing, in place of actually
engaging. Um, you know, I just don't
have a lot of respect for that.
>> To prove those critics wrong, let's say
you're here through 2028.
Um, we already touched on vaccines and
vaccine uptake, but what's something
that you would hope is sort of
concretely apparent by the end of your
tenure as proof of proof of success,
proof of batacharian victory? [laughter]
If life expectancy in this country goes
up over the next three or four three
four years, if the uh if the health care
system starts adopting um uh sort of
more effective ways to to to address the
chronic health conditions of the country
in in but in ways that are less
expensive than they currently are. Uh
that if the culture of science
establishes replication um as the core
basis of truth and the scientific
literature then becomes much more
trustworthy as a result. uh and if the
the the kinds of like uh frontier
scientific ideas especially the early
career scientists tend to tend to have
get funded more um and then some of
those ideas pan out as with fundamental
changes that we think about biio
medicine result in treatments and cures
that'll that that's the measure of
success
>> all right Jay Badacharia thank you so
much for joining me
>> thank Thank you.
[music]
>> [music]